Start september/october maintainer minutes (#2819)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/blog/2024/maintainers-minutes-2024-10-25.mdx

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';

The 'Maintainers Minutes' aims to further give insight into the workings of the [nf-core maintainers team](/governance#maintainers)
by providing brief summaries of the monthly team meetings.

## Overview

In this double post, we discussed the following topics in September and October:

-   XXX SEPT POINT
-   XXX SEPT PONINT
-   [New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts](new-way-of-passing-parameters-to-modules-within-nf-test-scripts)
-   [Stalled PRs due to waiting for review](stalled-prs-due-to-waiting-for-review)
-   [Replacing monolithic `conf/modules.conf` into per module-configs](replacing-monolithic-confmodulesconf-into-per-module-configs)
-   [Modification of modules specifications regarding channels](modifications-of-modules-specifications-regarding-channels)

### XXX SEPT POINT

### XXX SEPT POINT

## New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts

Our nf-core/modules have greatly benefited from the new nf-test implementation.
However one pet peeve for many is the greatly increased number of files that now comes with each module when installing on a pipeline (>100 file pipeline PRs anyone 😱).

> Fortunately <Profile username="mahesh-panchal">Mahesh Binzer-Panchal</Profile> has made a [proof of concept](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/5706) to help reduce this number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately <Profile username="mahesh-panchal">Mahesh Binzer-Panchal</Profile> has made a [proof of concept](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/5706) to help reduce this number, by reducing the number of configs needed to test different parameters which previously required a separate config to test different parameters.
```

By moving parameters into `when` blocks within the main nf-test script file, we can drop the test-only `nextflow.config` file that many modules have 🎉.

The proposal received unanimous approval.
Mahesh will now begin to formalise this by updating the [nf-core/modules specifications](https://nf-co.re/docs/guidelines/components/modules), and we can start to begin adding additional linting tests to help transfer to this system.

:::info
This system only applies to modules nf-test, and should not be used at pipeline level!
:::

## Stalled PRs due to waiting for review

It was raised that regularly get almost-complete module PRs, but sometimes they stall because a reviewer leaves comments but does not come back to re-review.
Even if the module author receives a second approving review, but the author often (because we are nice here at nf-core) doesn't feel comfortable merging without getting the approval from the original reviewer.

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Reviewer: im thinking maybe 3 months is too long ?? how about 1 month instead ? as I fear if this a nf-core beginner adopter and if they have to report back to their work that can't get it done for another 3 months they might lose interest

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Reviewer 2: Also wasn't the problem her the author not the reviewer?

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Reviewer: well if an author delays, thats their issue I guess. I think the point here is if nf-core reviewers delay the complete review

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Reviewer 2: the discussion arose around https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/5706, where the module maintainer didn'didn't come back to a PR changing things in their module.

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Reviewer 3: Ah yes, I remember that one, I haven't bumped it recently.

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Author: We are talking about the PR author here though not the person who originally created the module. I don't think we should have people 'own' a module, just act as a good contact point.

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Author: > im thinking maybe 3 months is too long ?? how about 1 month instead ? as I fear if this a nf-core beginner adopter and if they have to report back to their work that can't get it done for another 3 months they might lose interest

1 month also fine with me, I just said 3 months as a random number during the meeting (based on that PR)

> After a short discussion we felt that we can add a new reviewing guideline that if all (reasonable) comments have been addressed, and an approval has been given by another reviewer, a PR should be merged after 3 months if the original reviewer did not re-review.

Author: > Also wasn't the problem her the author not the reviewer?

They wanted to review the PR, thus a reviewer

> If the original reviewer was temporarily unable to review during this period (which can happen!), the module can still be corrected in a follow up review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the original reviewer was temporarily unavailable during this period (which can happen!), the module can still be updated in a follow-up review.
```

> ## Replacing monolithic `conf/modules.conf` into per module-configs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Replacing monolithic `conf/modules.conf` with per-module configs
```

A contentious point was brought up by the developers of [nf-core/rnaseq](https://nf-co.re/rnaseq) and [nf-core/methylseq](https://nf-co.re/methylseq).

Both pipelines recently have experimented with modifying the ways in which modules and processes can get customised by config files.
Currently, the nf-core template has a single file - `conf/modules.conf` - where all module-level configurations occur (specifying additional arguments, file publication specifications etc.).

> The two pipelines have instead tried to split this single monolithic file into multiple, with one config file per module e.g. [in this nf-core/methylseq PR](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq/commit/7b276c97589b65153ae23b34fcf4f6da86bb8d70).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two pipelines, however, have opted to split this single monolithic file into multiple files, with one config file per module e.g. [in this nf-core/methylseq PR](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq/commit/7b276c97589b65153ae23b34fcf4f6da86bb8d70).
```

> One of the main aims of this is to make CI testing more efficient, by modifications to a config only triggering related tests, rather than the whole suite of tests (as all modules are reliant on the one config file).
> Another reason is to make modules and configurations even more modular and thus portable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main goal of this approach is to make CI testing more efficient by allowing changes to a specific config to trigger only the related tests rather than the entire test suite (since all modules are currently dependent on a single config file).
Another reason is to increase the modularity and portability of modules and their configurations.
```

This proposal initially brought up a lot of consternation with most of the other maintainers present.

> The primary reason for this is the fear of findability by users, such as if they want to see which parameters of the tool is customised within the module.
> Currently we can point them to a single file within a single directory, and they can search that.
> By splitting into potentially hundreds of files, there was a fear it'll make it much harder for users to discover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary issue was the potential impact on usability, specifically regarding the ease with which users can locate customized parameters within each module.
Currently, we can direct users to a single file within a single directory, simplifying their search.
Splitting configurations into potentially hundreds of files could make it significantly harder for users to find what they need.
```

> Furthermore, the system is not currently 'natively' supported by Nextflow (where modules can automatically detect and load `nextflow.config` files next to the `main.nf`), meaning a lot of manual work to manually `include` the config for each module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, this approach isn’t currently supported by Nextflow’s native capabilities, which would allow modules to automatically detect and load nextflow.config files alongside main.nf. As a result, a substantial amount of manual work would be needed to manually include each module’s config.
```

> A long debate occurred around this topic, ultimately between user readable vs developer efficiency and which should take more priority.
> For example, maybe efficiency should be pushed to the nf-core/tools or GitHub CI configuration level where we can do some clever things to serve the same purpose.
> Alternatively we can wait for Nextflow native support to make this less onerous to the developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lengthy discussion ensued, weighing user readability against developer efficiency and which should take priority.
For instance, efficiency improvements could be made at the level of nf-core/tools or GitHub CI configurations, where optimizations might achieve similar goals.
Alternatively, waiting for native Nextflow support could eventually reduce the workload on developers.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Sarek developers proposed a middle ground that has worked well in Sarek: triggering tests on smaller chunks while maintaining findability. Their approach involves naming config files after each process and storing all configs within a `conf/modules/` folder. This setup makes configurations easy to locate and include while still achieving modularity. see sarek's module configs organization [here](https://github.com/nf-core/sarek/tree/master/conf/modules)
```

tuple value(meta), path(fai)
tuple value(meta), path(dict)
```

Where ensuring each file was associated with it's companion could be facilitated with (relatively) standardised `multiMap()` calls.

By forcing a particular structure of a singular input tuple (former example), it restricted pipeline developers in how they can do their own file shuttling between processes, potentially requiring many custom `map` functions to restructure channels.

On the flipside, there are some instances (think `samtools`) where a particular file will _always_ be accompanied by a secondary file such as index files.
By combining these into a single tuple would make it easier to chain such modules with extremely uniform input file requirements.

Recently the module specifications had been relaxed to allow such cases of the former, but also in particular that different file format variants serving the same function (`.bai` vs `.csi` files for example), could be represented in the same element of a 'collapsed' input channel.

For example, an output channel could be like so:

```nextflow
output:
tuple value(meta), path("*bam"), path(".{bai,csi}"),
path(fasta)
path(fai)
path(dict)
```

> Some maintainers did not like this, and rather wanted to go back to strict and always requiring each input file to be in it's own input channel.
> Their reasoning was that it can be dangerous e.g. if a misconfiguration in a pipeline could result in the _wrong_ type of index file, and cause the pipeline to fail when a downstream process received the wrong type of index file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some maintainers expressed a preference for a stricter approach, advocating for each input file to be provided in its own input channel.
Their concern was that shared channels could introduce risks, such as misconfiguration, where the wrong type of index file could inadvertently be supplied, causing the pipeline to fail if a downstream process receives an incompatible file type.
```

> We discussed wishes for 'typed' inputs (possibly coming natively to Nextflow in the future), versus code clarity (not constantly having to constantly `.join` and `.combine` after each module call).
> Different philosophies came to the fore, whether trying to cover _all_ cases of errors of users is reasonable, versus pipelines only supporting specific configurations and parameters, and modifications away from this (e.g. via `ext.args`) being entirely at a users risk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We discussed the potential benefits of ‘typed’ inputs—possibly a future feature in Nextflow—versus the importance of code clarity, which is challenged by the need to repeatedly use .join and .combine after each module call.
Differing philosophies emerged: some felt it essential to design pipelines that prevent all possible user errors, while others suggested pipelines should support only specific configurations and parameters, with any deviations (e.g., via ext.args) being at the user’s own risk.
```

### XXX SEPT POINT

### XXX SEPT POINT

## New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts

Our nf-core/modules have greatly benefited from the new nf-test implementation. However one pet peeve for many is the greatly increased number of files that now comes with each module when installing on a pipeline (>100 file pipeline PRs anyone 😱).

Fortunately <Profile username="mahesh-panchal">Mahesh Binzer-Panchal</Profile> has made a [proof of concept](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/5706) aimed at reducing the number of config files needed for testing different parameters. This approach consolidates configs that previously required separate files to test different parameters into a single `nextflow.config`, helping streamline testing processes.

Another implementation example can be seen in the `bismark/align` module used in methylseq pipeline:

-   [param declaration in `when` block](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq/blob/master/modules/nf-core/bismark/align/tests/main.nf.test#L28-L33)
-   [test `nextflow.config`](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq/blob/master/modules/nf-core/bismark/align/tests/nextflow.config)

> By moving parameters into `when` blocks within the main nf-test script file, we can have a single `nextflow.config` file with the `ext.args` for the process set to the parameter set in the `when` block.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
By moving parameters into `when` blocks within the main nf-test script file, we can have a single `nextflow.config` file with the `ext.args` for the process set to the parameter defined in the `when` block.
```

The proposal received unanimous approval. Mahesh will now begin to formalise this by updating the [nf-core/modules specifications](https://nf-co.re/docs/guidelines/components/modules), and we can start to begin adding additional linting tests to help transfer to this system.

:::info
This system only applies to modules nf-test, and should not be used at pipeline level!
:::

## Stalled PRs Due to Pending Reviews

It has been noted that we occasionally receive almost-complete module PRs that stall because a reviewer leaves comments but does not return for a re-review.

> Even if the module author receives a second approving review, they often (since we’re considerate here at nf-core) feel uncomfortable merging without the original reviewer’s approval.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Even if the module author receives a second approving review, they may feel uncomfortable merging without the original contributor’s approval. 
```

I removed the "since we're considerate here" since as I feel it sounds a little condescending.

After a brief discussion, we agreed to introduce a new reviewing guideline: if all reasonable comments have been addressed and another reviewer has approved, the PR should be merged after 1 month if the original reviewer has not returned for a re-review.

> If the original reviewer was temporarily unavailable during this period (which can happen!), the module can still be updated in a follow-up review.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the original reviewer was temporarily unavailable during this period (which can happen!), the module can still be updated in a follow-up PR. 
```

Currently, the nf-core template has a single file - `conf/modules.conf` - where all module-level configurations occur (specifying additional arguments, file publication specifications etc.).

The two pipelines, however, have opted to split this single monolithic file into multiple files, with one config file per module e.g. [in this nf-core/methylseq PR](https://github.com/nf-core/methylseq/commit/7b276c97589b65153ae23b34fcf4f6da86bb8d70).

The main goal of this approach is to make CI testing more efficient by allowing changes to a specific config to trigger only the related tests rather than the entire test suite (since all modules are currently dependent on a single config file).
Another reason is to increase the modularity and portability of modules and their configurations.

This proposal initially brought up a lot of consternation with most of the other maintainers present. The primary issue was the potential impact on usability, specifically regarding the ease with which users can locate customized parameters within each module.
Currently, we can direct users to a single file within a single directory, simplifying their search.

> Splitting configurations into potentially hundreds of files could make it significantly harder for users to find what they need. Additionally, this approach isn’t currently supported by Nextflow’s native capabilities, which would allow modules to automatically detect and load nextflow.config files alongside main.nf. As a result, a substantial amount of manual work would be needed to manually include each module’s config.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Splitting configurations into potentially hundreds of files could make it significantly harder for users to find what they need. It's also unclear if another file has an overriding setting for a module, for example that's defined in the subworkflow folder rather than the module folder. Additionally, this approach isn’t currently supported by Nextflow’s native capabilities, which would allow modules to automatically detect and load nextflow.config files alongside main.nf. As a result, a substantial amount of manual work would be needed to manually include each module’s config.
```

-   [New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts](new-way-of-passing-parameters-to-modules-within-nf-test-scripts)
-   [Stalled PRs due to waiting for review](stalled-prs-due-to-waiting-for-review)
-   [Replacing monolithic `conf/modules.conf` into per module-configs](replacing-monolithic-confmodulesconf-into-per-module-configs)
-   [Modification of modules specifications regarding channels](modifications-of-modules-specifications-regarding-channels)

### Massive modules update

The nf-core/modules update taskforce have been hard at work, and has :drum: surprise :drum: massively updated the modules:

-   https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/5828

The list is still pretty long, but we will get there.

### Pipeline level test with nf-test

A new plugin for nf-test was created to facilitate pipeline level test, it's [nft-utils](https://github.com/nf-core/nft-utils/), and it's already implemented in methylseq, rnaseq, sarek and some other pipelines.
Maxime has made [a bytesize](https://nf-co.re/events/2024/bytesize_pipeline_level_tests_with_nftest) about it.

## TEMPLATE update

A nf-core/tools release will happen.

> OK, it already happened by now, and all the new stuff is nicely [listed here](https://nf-co.re/blog/2024/tools-3_0_0).

Author: Agree

A lengthy discussion ensued, weighing user readability against developer efficiency and which should take priority. For instance, efficiency improvements could be made at the level of nf-core/tools or GitHub CI configurations, where optimizations might achieve similar goals.
Alternatively, waiting for native Nextflow support could eventually reduce the workload on developers.

The sarek developers proposed a middle ground that has worked well in sarek: triggering tests on smaller chunks while maintaining findability. Their approach involves naming config files after each process and storing all configs within a `conf/modules/` folder. This setup makes configurations easy to locate and include while still achieving modularity. see sarek's module configs organization [here](https://github.com/nf-core/sarek/tree/master/conf/modules)

> A general agreement was that this new system is not yet palatable to enough maintainers to propose push to the template, however that `nf-core/rnaseq` and `nf-core/methylseq` can continue to refine this approach based on what `nf-core/sarek` developers have proposed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A general agreement was that this new system is not yet palatable to enough for maintainers to propose pushing split configs to the template. However, `nf-core/rnaseq` and `nf-core/methylseq` can continue to refine this approach based on what `nf-core/sarek` developers have proposed.
```

Developers agreed to revisit and review this approach again in a couple of months.

## Modification of modules specifications regarding channels

Finally, we debated pros- and cons- of different ways of structuring input channels in modules.

In the initial design of DSL2 nf-core modules, it was decided to require one input channel per file type, and not support 'mega-tuples', due to readability and portability.

For example, this was found to be less readable:

```nextflow
input:
tuple value(meta), path(bam), path(bai), path(fasta), path(fai), path(dict)
```

Compared to:

```nextflow
input:
tuple value(meta), path(bam)
tuple value(meta), path(bai)
tuple value(meta), path(fasta)
tuple value(meta), path(fai)
tuple value(meta), path(dict)
```

> Where ensuring each file was associated with it's companion could be facilitated with (relatively) standardised `multiMap()` calls.

Reviewer 4: We should have an example here:

````suggestion
Where ensuring each file was associated with it's companion could be facilitated with (relatively) standardised `multiMap()` calls.

```nextflow
combined_channel.multiMap { meta, bam, bai, fasta, fai, dict ->
    bam: tuple( meta, bam )
    bai: tuple( meta, bai )
    fasta: tuple ( meta, fasta )
    fai: tuple ( meta, fai )
    dict: tuple ( meta, dict )
}
.set { process_in }
PROCESS (
    process_in.bam,
    process_in.bai,
    process_in.fasta,
    process_in.fai,
    process_in.dict,
)
```

:::info
`multiMap` should only be used in this way when directly providing process inputs. It's not a general method of synchronising channel inputs.
:::
````

-   [Modification of modules specifications regarding channels](modifications-of-modules-specifications-regarding-channels)

### Massive modules update

The nf-core/modules update taskforce have been hard at work, and has :drum: surprise :drum: massively updated the modules:

-   https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/5828

The list is still pretty long, but we will get there.

### Pipeline level test with nf-test

A new plugin for nf-test was created to facilitate pipeline level test, it's [nft-utils](https://github.com/nf-core/nft-utils/), and it's already implemented in methylseq, rnaseq, sarek and some other pipelines.
Maxime has made [a bytesize](https://nf-co.re/events/2024/bytesize_pipeline_level_tests_with_nftest) about it.

### helpdesk is the new coffee-n-code

Stay tuned, it's coming pretty soon.

## New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts

Our nf-core/modules have greatly benefited from the new nf-test implementation. However one pet peeve for many is the greatly increased number of config files that now comes with each module when installing on a pipeline (>100 file pipeline PRs anyone 😱).

> Fortunately <Profile username="mahesh-panchal">Mahesh Binzer-Panchal</Profile> has made a [proof of concept](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/5706) aimed at reducing the number of config files needed for testing different parameters. This approach consolidates configs that previously required separate files to test different parameters into a single `nextflow.config`, helping streamline testing processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately <Profile username="mahesh-panchal">Mahesh Binzer-Panchal</Profile> has made a [proof of concept](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/6788/) aimed at reducing the number of config files needed for testing different parameters. This approach consolidates configs that previously required separate files to test different parameters into a single `nextflow.config`, helping streamline testing processes.
```

Reviewer 4: Nice catch!

---
title: 'Maintainers Minutes: September/October 2024'
subtitle: 'Keeping you informed of the latest maintainers discussions'
pubDate: 2024-10-28T12:00:00+01:00
headerImage: '/assets/images/blog/maintainers-minutes-2024-07-26/maintainers_duck.png'
headerImageAlt: 'Cartoon yellow rubber duck with nf-core logo badge on its body with the nf-core logo.'
headerImageDim: [250, 250]
embedHeaderImage: true
authors:
    - 'jfy133'
    - 'maxulysse'
    - 'sateeshperi'
label:
    - 'maintainers'
---

import Profile from '@components/GitHubProfilePictureExtended.svelte';
import { Image } from 'astro:assets';

The 'Maintainers Minutes' aims to give further insight into the workings of the [nf-core maintainers team](/governance#maintainers)
by providing brief summaries of the monthly team meetings.

## Overview

In this double post, we discussed the following topics in September and October:

-   [Massive modules update](massive-modules-update)
-   [Pipeline level test with nf-test](Pipeline-level-test-with-nf-test)

> -   [TEMPLATE update](TEMPLATE-update)

Author: ```suggestion
```

-   [helpdesk is the new coffee-n-code[(helpdesk-is-the-new-coffee-n-code)
-   [New way of passing parameters to modules within nf-test scripts](new-way-of-passing-parameters-to-modules-within-nf-test-scripts)
-   [Stalled PRs due to waiting for review](stalled-prs-due-to-waiting-for-review)
-   [Replacing monolithic `conf/modules.conf` into per module-configs](replacing-monolithic-confmodulesconf-into-per-module-configs)
-   [Modification of modules specifications regarding channels](modifications-of-modules-specifications-regarding-channels)

### Massive modules update

The nf-core/modules update taskforce have been hard at work, and has :drum: surprise :drum: massively updated the modules:

-   https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/5828

The list is still pretty long, but we will get there.

### Pipeline level test with nf-test

A new plugin for nf-test was created to facilitate pipeline level test, it's [nft-utils](https://github.com/nf-core/nft-utils/), and it's already implemented in methylseq, rnaseq, sarek and some other pipelines.
Maxime has made [a bytesize](https://nf-co.re/events/2024/bytesize_pipeline_level_tests_with_nftest) about it.

> ## TEMPLATE update
> 
> A nf-core/tools release will happen.
> OK, it already happened by now, and all the new stuff is nicely [listed here](https://nf-co.re/blog/2024/tools-3_0_0).
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: 'Maintainers Minutes: September/October 2024'
subtitle: 'Keeping you informed of the latest maintainers discussions'

> pubDate: 2024-10-27T12:00:00+02:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2024-10-27T12:00:00+01:00
```

headerImage: '/assets/images/blog/maintainers-minutes-2024-07-26/maintainers_duck.png'
headerImageAlt: "Cartoon yellow rubber duck with nf-core logo badge on it's body with the nf-core logo."
headerImageDim: [250, 250]
embedHeaderImage: true
authors:
    - 'jfy133'

>     - 'MaxUlysse

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - 'MaxUlysse'
```
